Properties kdd (#9583)
msupply-foundation/open-msupply: decisions/2025-10-16_properties.md

6. User can sort a table by a property set for that table
7. User can configure and use properties at a particular store/site only (to be confirmed)
8. A subset of mSupply custom properties (set to be decided) will be visible in Open mSupply. These properties will not be configurable in Open mSupply but will be visible and editable where applicable

There is also a requirement from customisation/plugin end to extend existing records for display/logic, we can feed two birds with one scone having plugins and customisations also using properties, configuration/property setting and display UI for free. 

## Options

### Option 1 - Relational

As per below diagram.

![media](media/properties.drawio.png)

Considerations for performance:

- Can apply broad indexes across the whole `property_value` table
- Harder to create ideal indexes - more indirection through joins

Considerations for sync:

- More complex then JSON, need to track and lookup attached records to know where to sync to

> - Handles Requirement 8 well if we choose to tackle that

Reviewer: Should say requirement 7

<!-- Also adding property configuration functionality to omSupply is slightly easier with "Option 1", however syncing properties attached to remote records is slightly harder (although properties for remote records would only be syncable with V7) -->

Considerations for performance (based on results from `9583-properties-kdd-prototype-feature-sync` - see [Appendix](#appendix---performance-testing)):

- Whenever parsing json in DB (for sorting/filtering) use binary JSON columns - there's no downside
- Slower than Relational but not by a crazy amount - even with 60 properties per row
- With a targeted index for a particular property achieves better performance than relational

Considerations for sync:

- Slots into existing model cleanly (already have examples of synced json categories/properties in codebase), just follows along with attached row
- More data sent per update - no row partial updates in sync

> - Will require filtering/merging on sync if we want to tackle Requirement 8

Reviewer: Same here, should be requirement 7

# Properties in Open mSupply

- _Date_: 
- _Deciders_: 
- _Status_:  
- _Outcome_: 

## Context

Open mSupply should be extendable with user configurable and enterable fields.

### Requirements

1. User can configure a new property:
  a. type can be given one of Number (int), Text, Date, Real (Float), Option (user defined categories/options) 
  b. name can be given 
  c. translation can be given (would default to translation if one is found for current langauge, otherwise would use general name) 
  d. options can be hierarchical, i.e current item categories in mSupply or organisation units in DHIS2 (to be confirmed)
  e. tables which will have this property are specified, property can be re-used across many tables. (to be confirmed)

> 2. User is able to set properties based on configurations, properties should all be clearable. 

Author: f3f2a8f82c72302185afa7eee98fb2f04cc4bfb5

> 3. User can change property configurations, however migrations are too difficult to implement and maintain, it's well communicated that updates to configurations (like removing options or or changing option type) will not update existing value property values

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. User can change property configurations, however migrations are too difficult to implement and maintain, it's well communicated that updates to configurations (like removing options or changing option type) will not update existing value property values
```

## Options

### Option 1

As per below diagram.

![media](media/properties.drawio.png)

### Option 2

Using JSON structures to store properties rather then a table. This would be harder to sort and filter and would require the whole record to be synced. 

Also adding property configuration functionality to omSupply is slightly easier with "Option 1", however syncing properties attached to remote records is slightly harder (although properties for remote records would only be syncable with V7)

### Option 3

Have table specific property and/or property_value tables. The idea is to build for future performance in mind and reduce dynamic structured (usually safer and more readable/disoverable). However a pattern like would be very common and well understood, negating any effects this abstraction should have on readability/discoverability. As for performance, there is an assumption to be validated that table_name index together with record_id index will only speed up insert time (for index building), not query (query is the the performance concern, not insert), this goes in favour ot "Option 1".

### Option 4

> Store value as JSON rather then different typed fields. This would be easier in general but if we need to do any calculations, it would be slower. Also if configuration is changed for the property it would require higher congnitive load and likely translations (to make sure existing values work)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Store value as JSON rather than different typed fields. This would be easier in general but if we need to do any calculations, it would be slower. Also if configuration is changed for the property it would require higher cognitive load and likely translations (to make sure existing values work)
```

### Option 5

Instead of options, extend and use category table, see KDD, although it wasn't implemented yet to support full and extendable system, there is foundation for it (or change category to be properties) -> Combining properties with categories would be worth it if we consolidate all 'custom/dynamic' configurations, we have too many now:

item categories
asset categories/class
name properties
any other ?

## Further consideration

Reports - We can be quite generic with properties for most things, having generic filter/display in tables etc.. However in reports it would be hard to be generic with properties, especially at the time of display. Similar for report filters. 

> Multiple values - Do we need an array type element when multiple values can be associated for the same property ? This sounds more like tags, which is also something generic that should exist in OMS central

Reviewer 2: In what use cases were you thinking an array would be needed? 🤔 I think should be easy enough to add if it ever pops up?

Author: > In what use cases were you thinking an array would be needed? 🤔 I think should be easy enough to add if it ever pops up?

It's hard to query, especially in SQLite, thus would prefer a tag for those (like name tags), although could be property with lots of property_values right ? And then don't really need tags, hmm but tags are so well known by user, vs setting up more involved 'property', ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

### Option 4

Store value as JSON rather than different typed fields. This would be easier in general but if we need to do any calculations, it would be slower. Also if configuration is changed for the property it would require higher cognitive load and likely translations (to make sure existing values work)

### Option 5

Instead of options, extend and use category table, see KDD, although it wasn't implemented yet to support full and extendable system, there is foundation for it (or change category to be properties) -> Combining properties with categories would be worth it if we consolidate all 'custom/dynamic' configurations, we have too many now:

item categories
asset categories/class
name properties
any other ?

> ## Further consideration

Reviewer 3: I think this can come as an update later
